Rule 1: Fix your Posture
“To stand up straight with your shoulders back is to accept the terrible responsibility of life, with eyes wide open.”
All animals, including humans, are governed by dominance hierarchies and involuntary biochemical responses. Lobsters, for example, battle for dominance. During a confrontation, 2 lobsters size each other up using their body/claw sizes and chemical secretions (which signal their health, strength and mood). Dominant lobsters have higher serotonin levels, project greater confidence, a better posture, and can fight longer. An alpha lobster typically “wins” without even having to fight physically.
After each confrontation, a lobster’s brain changes—the loser avoids further conflict, whereas the victor gains even higher confidence and serotonin levels. Similar patterns can be found in other animal species—generally, stronger animals get more food, better “homes”, higher status, better mates, and greater cooperation from others. That’s nature’s way of distributing scarce resources.
Likewise, humans have a dominance detector in our brain. How we perceive our social/economic status affects our well-being which reinforces our status in a positive feedback loop.
• People with strong self-esteem feel/transmit a sense of security and confidence, which makes them more attractive and respected. This improves their productivity and well-being, which further reinforces their self-perception. Higher serotonin levels are associated with greater resilience, happiness, health, lifespan, pro-social behavior and leadership.
• On the other hand, people with a low self-perception feel insecure. They’re more likely to be stressed, jumpy and reactive. They make poor decisions, fail to command respect/resources, which reinforce their loser complex.
In short, our self-perception affects the vibes we transmit to create a self-reinforcing loop. If you feel like a loser for whatever reason, the first step is to break the negative cycle by correcting your posture.
• Don’t slouch. It conveys defeat and a low status, which prompts others to treat you poorly and reinforce your low self-perception.
• Fix your posture. Stand straight, push your shoulders back, speak up and make eye contact. This signals confidence to yourself and others. You’ll feel better, others will show you more respect, and it starts a virtuous cycle. It’s about standing tall, facing up to reality and taking responsibility to become all you can be.
Rule 2: Care for yourself like how you’d care for someone else
“Treat yourself like someone you are responsible for helping”
We tend to take better care of our pets than we do ourselves. When a pet is sick, we diligently follow the prescribed care. Yet, when we’re sick, we fail to fill/take our prescriptions. In the full summary we look at how our self-loathing plays a part and how to counter it.
Rule 3: Surround yourself with people who want the best for you
“Make friends with people who want the best for you”
We become the average of the people we spend the most time with. In the wrong company, we can end up in crime or even suicide. So, why do we hang around people who drag us down? Find out more from the complete 12 Rules for Life summary, and  learn how to surround yourself with the right people.
Rule 4: Improve your own game instead of playing others’
“Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today”
In a highly-connected, populous world, you can always find someone who’s better than you—be it in looks, wealth, status or relationships. No matter what you’ve achieved, you can still feel miserably inferior compared to others. Check out our full summary to learn how to improve your own game, fundamentally shift your viewpoint, and propel yourself towards your ideal life.
Rule 5: Teach your children to abide by society’s rules
“Do not let your children do anything that makes you dislike them”
Children aren’t born with social-cultural skills—they must be taught how the world works and how to navigate human society. Parents who don’t set clear boundaries for their young kids actually end up hurting them in the long run. Get our full 12 Rules for Life summary to learn the 5 principles to help your kids become well-liked.
Rule 6: Get your own house in order before criticizing others
“Set your house in perfect order before you criticize the world”
Setbacks and suffering are inevitable in life. Some people respond with denial, helplessness, anger, or even acts of vengeance (e.g. genocide). Yet, others are positively transformed by adversity—they make peace with what happened and devote themselves to making a positive difference. Which type are you? Learn more about getting your own house in order first, from the complete summary bundle.
Rule 7: Focus on a higher purpose, not instant gratification
“Pursue what is meaningful (not what is expedient)”
We can use suffering as an excuse to live carelessly in the moment, or we can do something meaningful to minimize the suffering. Peterson encourages individuals to aim for a higher purpose despite the irresistible forces that push for immediate satisfaction. In our full 12 Rules for Life summary, we share more insights on discovering who we are and what values to live by.
Rule 8: Find your personal truth and live it
“Tell the truth—or, at least, don’t lie”
Willful blindness is a common human practice, where we avoid facing uncomfortable truths. Find out why we lie, how we get stuck in a “life-lie” because and what it means to find and live your personal truth.
Rule 9: Learn to be a good listener
“Assume that the person you are listening to might know something you don’t”
People need a listening ear. As a good listener, you can learn while helping others to solve problems. In the 15-page version of our summary, we explain how talking helps people to think, how to be a good listener, and get the most from your conversations.
Rule 10: Define your problem precisely to make it manageable
“Be precise in your speech”
We avoid looking deeply into a problem in hope that it’ll go away by itself, but this only causes the doubts and uncertainties to build up into a catastrophic failure. Find out why/how to use specificity to bring order to chaos.
Rule 11: Accept that inequality exists
“Do not bother children when they are skateboarding”
Some post-modernists argue that gender is entirely a social construct or a tool for men to oppress women, and that hierarchies are created by the rich to exploit the poor. Peterson disagrees. Find out why this is so from our full summary!
Rule 12: Take time to appreciate the good things in life
“Pet a cat when you encounter one on the street”
Suffering is inevitable and some people just seem to have a worse lot in life than others. Peterson’s own daughter suffered from a rare juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, and was plagued with years of chronic pain. If you find yourself  wondering about the seemingly-pointless suffering around us, this last rule from the 12 Rules for Life helps us to see things from a different perspective and to balance the good and bad in life so life seems worth living.